---
title: "0.8.0 Migration Guide"
type: docs
weight: 110
---

When migrating from FactCast version 0.7.x to 0.8.0 there are some changes to be considered.

## Snapshot Cache Configuration

If you use Factus for aggregates or snapshot projections you now have to configure where to store the SnapshotCache.
Further documentation can be found [here]({{< ref "snapshot-caching.md" >}}).

## Changes to Redis Projections

### @RedisTransactional

For transactional Redis projections Factus now provides abstract classes. Projections that are annotated with
`@RedisTransactional` now must extend `AbstractRedisTxManagedProjection` or `AbstractRedisTxSubscribedProjection`
respectively. The annotation itself is optional, if no default settings are overwritten.

### @RedisBatched

The `@RedisBatched` annotation has been removed. Refactor your affected projections to extend the
respective [RedisTx]({{< ref "redis-transactional-projections.md" >}})
class.

- Further configuration of the batching behaviour is possible via the optional `@RedisTransactional` annotation.
- Handlers with a `RBatch` parameter now receive an `RTransaction` object instead. If you've previously used
  `batch.addAsync()`
  you can now apply the changes directly on the transaction using e.g. `transactionalSet.add()`.

Be aware that Redisson transactions do not support all `RObjects` (e.g. Multimaps or AtomicLong). In these cases you
have to decide if you can continue without transactionality, or adapt your projection's implementation.

## Removal of deprecated field in ProjectionMetaData

The deprecated field `serial` field was finally removed from `ProjectionMetaData`. Please use `revision` instead like in
the following example:

```java

@ProjectionMetaData(revision = 1)
public class MyProjection extends AbstractManagedProjection { ...
}
```

## Removal of deprecated dependencies for Compression

`org.xerial.snappy` and `net.jpountz.lz4` have been removed with version 0.8.0.
Please add the new `factcast-grpc-snappy` and `factcast-grpc-lz4` (preferred) dependencies in order to enable
compression via snappy or lz4 respectively.
Further documentation can be found [here]({{< ref "compression.md" >}}).
